Add initial AGENTS.md file (#9929)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: AGENTS.md

<!-- This file pulled in by every agent automatically. Keep it terse and minimal to 
avoid using too much context and making the agent worse. Write it for an agent, not a person.-->

# Environment

<!-- .venv is in gitignore. Need to tell it to not use glob tools.-->
1. Check `.venv` via `ls -ld .venv ../.venv`; no file-search/glob tools — may skip ignored dirs.
2. If found, run through its executables (e.g. `.venv/bin/python`, `.venv/bin/pre-commit`) or activate.

> 3. Report no venv only after shell check fails.

Reviewer: Fine for now, but likely a problem to later fix on Windows platforms.

Reviewer 2: Oh all those powershell things and distinct env setup; hopefully those intelligent models would figure it out on their own

Author: Also potentially something that can be solved by local personal overrides as well. But for now, this seems to work for me at least.

# AI Policy

<!-- Inspired by pytorch/CLAUDE.md-->

- **Never act autonomously on GitHub.** Do NOT open, edit, comment on, or reply to any issue or PR unless user reviewed and explicitly approved exact content.
- **Mark all AI-generated content.** Any text you produce going into issue, PR, or comment must wrap in code or quote block. Never present output as human-written.
- **Never emit only raw AI text as reply.** Any AI content must carry human commentary explaining relevance.

> - **No code user hasn't read.** Keep changes minimal, strip AI artifacts and needless complexity. PR on GitHub not ready or not user-reviewed — always open draft mode.

Reviewer 3: "PR on GitHub not ready or not user-reviewed — always open draft mode" what do you mean by this?

Reviewer 3: Do you mean something like "If a PR on GitHub is not ready or not user-reviewed, it should remain in draft mode"? I am guessing a little bit. :/

Author: Yes. If the pr is not ready or not user reviewed, it should be in draft mode.

Reviewer 3: If that is what you mean, could you please say so a bit more clearly? It is a bit hard for me to understand and I am afraid an agent would misinterpret it

Author: This was compressed to store the same information as the more wordy variant but consume less tokens and context window. It stores the same information for the purposes of an LLM, but without filler.

Reviewer 3: unfortunately it does not convey the same information

Reviewer 3: you don't need to expand it to a full sentence, it just needs to make some sense

Reviewer 3: How about "If the pr is not ready or not user reviewed, it should be in draft mode."

Author: MAybe "pr not ready or not user reviewed, draft mode."?

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can creatively use punctuation to convey meaning. "PR not ready or not user reviewed? Draft mode."

Author: Actually, that might even be better than what was there initially.

Reviewer 3: PR not ready or not user reviewed? Keep in draft mode.

Reviewer 3: Either one I'm cool with.

> - **No code user hasn't read.** Keep changes minimal, strip AI artifacts and needless complexity. PR on GitHub not ready or not user-reviewed — always open draft mode.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **No code user hasn't read.** Keep changes minimal, strip AI artifacts and needless complexity. PR not ready or not user reviewed? Keep in draft mode.
```

Reviewer 3: I know I'm not a blocking reviewer, so feel free to apply or dismiss.

Reviewer 3: The punctuation was kind of the thing that gave it meaning. :sob:

- No commit unless user explicitly asks.
- Disclose work authored with AI assistant, in individual commits and PR description.
- No solving good-first-issue with AI Agent.
- No silencing pylint warning or marking line `pragma: no cover` without human approval.

# Testing
<!-- Place testing before linting, so testing runs before linting -->

Tests use `pytest`, live under `tests/`.
Run only tests relevant to change, not whole suite.

New functionality and bug fixes need tests.

Docstring/code-example tests collected by Sybil (see `conftest.py`); run by pointing pytest at source file, e.g. `pytest pennylane/path/to/file.py`.

Validate new operator with `pennylane.ops.functions.assert_valid(op)`.

# Linting and formatting

<!--don't use pre-commit run as that fails in a sandboxed shell.-->

> Run configured tools directly on changed files. Pylint first, then formatting (black, isort) once at end.

Reviewer 3: You could mention `make format`?

Author: make format runs linting on *everything*.  I want this to run fast, so I only want it to run on changed files.

Reviewer 3: ok cool, no worries

<!--Order is important, as we dont want changes required for pylint to force black to rerun-->
<!--`--persistent=n` avoids writing a stats cache which a sandboxed shell can't access.-->
- Lint: `pylint -rn -sn --persistent=n --rcfile=.pylintrc <path> ...` for files under `pennylane/` (use `--rcfile=tests/.pylintrc` for `tests/` or `pennylane/labs/tests/`)

> - Format: `black --config ./pyproject.toml <path> ...`
> - Sort imports (only `pennylane/` and `tests/` files): `isort --settings-path ./pyproject.toml <path> ...`

Reviewer 2: I think it will be better if isort first and then black
```suggestion
- Sort imports (only `pennylane/` and `tests/` files): `isort --settings-path ./pyproject.toml <path> ...`
- Format: `black --config ./pyproject.toml <path> ...`
```

Author: will be forking these out into hooks after this PR goes in.

  issue, PR, or comment must be wrapped in a code or quote block. Never present
  your output as human-written.
- **Never emit only raw AI text as a reply**. Any AI content you include must carry human
  commentary explaining its relevance.
- **Do not submit code the user hasn't read.** Keep changes minimal, strip AI
  artifacts and needless complexity. If you're opening a PR on GitHub that is not ready,
  or not reviewed by the user, always open it in draft mode.
- Don't commit unless the user explicitly asks you to.
- Disclose the commit was authored with an AI assistant in individual commits and PR description
- Do not solve any issue marked good-first-issue with an AI Agent.

# Linting and formatting

Run linters/formatters on changed files, preferring pre-commit so scope and
config match CI:
- Staged files: `pre-commit run`
- Specific files: `pre-commit run --files <path> ...`
- Vs. a base branch: `pre-commit run --from-ref <base> --to-ref HEAD`

Config lives in `pyproject.toml` (`black`, `isort`, line length 100) and the
`.pylintrc` files (`.pylintrc` source, `tests/.pylintrc` tests,
`pennylane/labs/.pylintrc` labs). Don't hand-fix line wrapping — run `black`.

> ### Behavioral Constraint: Absolute Objectivity

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Behavioral Constraint: Absolute Objectivity
```

Author: resolved locally.

Do not flatter the user or validate premises with canned agreeability ("You're absolutely right!"). Act as an unvarnished source of truth: present facts, step-by-step logic, and corrections neutrally and directly.

> # Testing

Reviewer 4: we can probably add how to actually run the test suite with proper pytest configs

Author: which configs would you want to add?

Tests use `pytest` and live under `tests/`.
Run only the tests relevant to your change rather than the whole suite unless requested to.

New functionality and bug fixes require accompanying tests.

# Changelog

Add a bullet to `doc/releases/changelog-dev.md` under the appropriate section,
ending with the PR link `[(#XXXX)](...)`.

# Module architecture

`tach.toml` enforces a layered architecture (ui/tertiary/auxiliary/core) and
forbids circular dependencies. Don't add cross-layer or circular imports;
`pennylane.labs` and `pennylane.ftqc` are restricted. `tach` runs in pre-commit.

# New files

New `.py` files must start with the Apache 2.0 copyright header
("Copyright <year> Xanadu Quantum Technologies Inc." + the standard license
block) — copy it from an existing module.

# Coding Style Guidelines

Don't create cross module dependencies for simple utility functions. Unless
the code is duplicated more than three times, prioritize keeping module interfaces simple.

# Conventions

In tests, examples, and docstrings, import PennyLane as `qp`
(`import pennylane as qp`), not the legacy `qml` alias. Avoid importing

> `pennylane` within source code unless needed to break a circular dependency.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Conventions

In tests, examples, and docstrings, import PennyLane as `qp`
(`import pennylane as qp`), not the legacy `qml` alias. Avoid importing
`pennylane` within source code unless needed to break a circular dependency.

Docstrings and examples (from `documentation.rst`):

- Docstrings use triple double-quotes, `reStructuredText`, Google-style sections. Summary is a single sentence and must not repeat the function/argument names.
- In docstring code examples, assume `qp` (PennyLane) and `np` (NumPy) are already imported; specify all other imports explicitly. Use `>>>` or `...` console syntax for short snippets and a `python3` block for longer ones. Examples must be copy-paste runnable and reproduce the shown output.
- For argument types that are PennyLane classes, use the (`~.Operation`) shorthand. Do not use `:class:` or `:func:` roles in the type field.
- Don't manually list a module's contents or a class's methods in docstrings (`sphinx-automodapi` auto-generates these). Don't docstring magic methods unless behaviour is non-standard.
- Use Canadian spelling (colour, centre, realize).
- Comment to explain the implementation/algorithm, never to restate the code. Keep comments adjacent to the code, no markup/tables.

Math and operators (from `adding_operators.rst`):

- Use the framework-agnostic `qp.math` library, not raw NumPy, for anything touching trainable inputs (they may be `torch`, `tf`, or `jax` tensors).
- Validate a new operator with `qp.ops.functions.assert_valid(op)`.
- Keep input and sanity checks minimal; they add overhead and clash with JIT.

```

Author: I'm starting to wonder if some of these should be broken out into individual skills so we can keep this file more concise. I'm realizing it's just getting longer and longer, and I think they're supposed to stay pretty concise. Let me investigate skills a bit more.

Reviewer 4: Adding "skills" :star:

Author: Adding the suggestions from the math and operators suggestions.

For the docs suggestions, I'm still hesitant about using AI to write docstrings.  I still think that should be the responsibility of the developer.

# Environment

If any tool you're trying to use (pip, python, etc) is missing, check for
a `.venv` directory in the project root or its parent directory. If found,

> activate it and retry.

Reviewer 3: Worth mentioning `anaconda`?

Author: This just sets general convention that we can follow for improved agent integration. It's still up to the developer to set up the environment. Individuals can also provide local private files to override this generic repo default if they want to do something bespoke.

Reviewer 3: sure

3. Only report that no virtual environment exists after the shell check fails.

# AI Policy

<!-- Inspired by pytorch/CLAUDE.md-->

- **You may never act autonomously on GitHub.** Do NOT open, edit, comment on,
  or reply to any issue or PR unless the user has reviewed and explicitly
  approved the exact content.
- **Mark all AI-generated content.** Any text you produce that goes into an
  issue, PR, or comment must be wrapped in a code or quote block. Never present
  your output as human-written.
- **Never emit only raw AI text as a reply**. Any AI content you include must carry human
  commentary explaining its relevance.
- **Do not submit code the user hasn't read.** Keep changes minimal, strip AI
  artifacts and needless complexity. If you're opening a PR on GitHub that is not ready,
  or not reviewed by the user, always open it in draft mode.
- Don't commit unless the user explicitly asks you to.

> - Disclose the commit was authored with an AI assistant in individual commits and PR description

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Disclose that the work was authored with an AI assistant, both in the individual commits and in the PR description.
```

# Linting and formatting

Run linters/formatters on changed files, preferring pre-commit so scope and
config match CI:
- Staged files: `pre-commit run`
- Specific files: `pre-commit run --files <path> ...`
- Vs. a base branch: `pre-commit run --from-ref <base> --to-ref HEAD`

Config lives in `pyproject.toml` (`black`, `isort`, line length 100) and the
`.pylintrc` files (`.pylintrc` source, `tests/.pylintrc` tests,
`pennylane/labs/.pylintrc` labs). Don't hand-fix line wrapping — run `black`.

# Our Relationship

> NEVER write the phrase "You're absolutely right!" You are not a sycophant. 

Reviewer 2: Lolllll

<img width="512" height="512" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e2a6a8d2-d7fd-4fc9-ae87-0ebe63c4de52" />

# Testing

> Tests use `pytest` and live under `tests/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tests use `python -m pytest` and live under `tests/`.
```

Author: The environment configuration takes care of this.

Run only the tests relevant to your change rather than the whole suite unless requested to.

> New functionality and bug fixes require accompanying tests.

Reviewer 3: Might be worth mentioning unit testing is always required and integration testing where appropriate.
